# Climate Claims Assignment - Computer Modelling Versus Observations of Reality
By ***Emma Tutt***
 
## My top-5 list
1. [NYTimes Hurricane Analysis is Purposefully Misleading](https://wattsupwiththat.com/2022/09/30/nytimes-hurricane-analysis-is-purposefully-misleading/). This article claims that there is no strong evidence linking Hurricane Ian to climate change, as a result of increased frequency and severity of Atlantic hurricanes. I was prompted to rethink my current understanding of whether the frequency and intensity of hurricanes is increasing, due to the way in which the article provided a scientific article by supposably the leading climate scientists in the entire field to support the claim being made.
2. [Evidence Over Ideology](https://climatechange101.ca/learn-more-about-climate-change/evidence-over-ideology/). This article claims that the current models being used to inform climate change policies are based on exaggerated models versus observation of reality, which is skewing our perception of the impact of greenhouse gasses and global warming. My current views on whether global warming is a current issue were questioned by compelling figures and graphs supporting the claim that the Earth is currently experiencing a global cooling epoch. 
3. [No evidence that climate change is accelerating sea level rise](https://www.scienceunderattack.com/blog/2019/9/23/no-evidence-that-climate-change-is-accelerating-sea-level-rise-35). This article claims there is no scientific evidence proving that that rate of sea level rising is accelerating or that sea level rise is a result of human contribution to global warming. I questioned my current understanding of sea level rising when this claim used a figure from the IPCC to demonstrate how sea level fluctuates considerably over time, and accounts for regional variation.
4. ['Global warming not caused by humans' says robot](https://www.energylivenews.com/2017/08/25/global-warming-not-caused-by-humans-says-robot/). This article cliams that based on an artificial neural network (ANN), evidence states that global warming is a result of natural fluctuations rather than human actions. This claim provided convincing evidence as it uses tree rings and patterns of sea creature shells to develop a novel model of global temperatures from the period before records began, and uses this model to explain that the current global warming the Earth is experiencing corresponds to historic patterns derived from the ANN and therefore can be largely attributed to natural phenomena. 
5. [C02 and Temperature](http://www.co2science.org/articles/V24/nov/a1.php). This article claims that natural forces are playing a significant role in global warming and are responsible for the temperature reversals seen in the past two centuries. My current understanding of the relationship between atmospheric C02 and temperature was questioned based on three things; a more accurate algorithm that should be used to model these two variables, evidence of a stronger relationship between homicides and temperature, and gaps in the model where global temperatures fall while C02 continues to increase.   

## Top Claim Analysis
Evidence over ideology. 2002. Climate Change 101. [online] Available at: https://climatechange101.ca/learn-more-about-climate-change/evidence-over-ideology/ [Accessed 18 October 2022]. 

"This article claims that climate change policies are based on exaggerated models versus observations of reality, which is skewing our perception on the impact of global warming. I choose to further explore this article because the claims they made appeared to be supported by research from scientists in the field. I also choose this article as it is published by an outreach project called Friends of Science society, which is composed of a group of earth, atmospheric, and solar scientists who have been reviewing climate change literature since 2002 (Fisher, 2002). Through performing a background check I confirmed that the advisors of this society are all professional scientists or researchers. However, through this I also learned that this society is largely funded by the fossil fuel industry which therefore suggests potential for bias and inaccurate claims. The first section of this article discusses the global temperature change from 1979 - 2015. Comparisons are made between the computer simulations that are used to inform the International Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) compared to values obtained from satellites and weather balloons which both directly measure temperature. This analysis suggests that the computer simulations predict a 0.8˚C increase in global temperature, whereas the direct measurements predict a 0.2˚C increase. However, a scientific article published in the Journal of Science analyzes global temperature warming from 1978 - 2002 using satellites and reported that their analysis suggests an increase of 0.22˚C - 0.26˚C per 10 years (Vinnikov and Grody, 2003). This suggests that between 1979 - 2015 the global temperature increases by 0.77˚C – 0.91˚C which closely aligns with the values obtained from the computer simulations. Therefore, the evidence from this scientific paper disproves the logical validity of this claim. The last section of the article states that the sun is entering a low phase of activity, which some solar scientists believe will result in global cooling. The article references research from a Russian astrophysicist, suggesting the possibility of entering a cooling cycle which may last for decades, and could result in a small ice age. While checking the plausibility of these statements I found that Habibullov Abdussamatov, the Russian astrophysicist, is considered a global warming skeptic and his view on the cause of climate change contradicts the scientific consensus. He believes that global warming is due to high intensity of solar radiation, rather than emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Additionally, I found the specific paper from Habibullov Abdussamatov, which this article references and determined that is published in the Science and Public Policy Institute (SPPI), which is an advocacy organization focusing on global warming skepticism (Abdussamatov, 2013). All articles published in the SPPI are original papers which are not peer-reviewed, and therefore are subject to significant bias and greatly questions the credibility of research written by Habibullov Abdussamatov. Additionally, the paper was published in 2013 and suggests that global cooling would immense soon after, however, to this date scientific studies have consistently proved that the Earth is continuing to warm. To analyze the plausibility of the statements made in this section I researched whether scientific studies from peer-reviewed sources support this claim. I found that many papers, including the 2022 IPCC state that the global temperature is predicted to continue rising over the next several decades (Pörtner et al., 2022). I was unable to find any peer-reviewed scientific articles which support the possibility of the Earth entering a global cooling phase. Overall, there is limited scientific evidence to support the claims made in this article which greatly questions the accuracy and validity of results drawn, and the plausibility of the future predictions made."
### References 
1. Abdussamatov, H., 2013. Grand Minimum of the Total Solar Irradiance Leads to the Little Ice Age. SPPI. [online] Available at: <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273361640_Grand_Minimum_of_the_Total_Solar_Irradiance_Leads_to_the_Little_Ice_Age> [Accessed 23 October 2022].
2. Fisher, M., 2002. Science and Public Policy Institute. DeSmog. Available at: <https://www.desmog.com/science-and-public-policy-institute/> [Accessed 23 October 2022].
3. Pörtner, H.-O., Roberts, D.C., Tignor, M.M.B., Poloczanska, E.S., Mintenbeck, K., Alegría, A., Craig, M., Langsdorf, S., Löschke, S., Möller, V., Okem, A. and Rama, B. eds., 2022. Summary for policymakers. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press
4. Vinnikov, K.Y. and Grody, N.C., 2003. Global Warming Trend of Mean Tropospheric Temperature Observed by Satellites. Science, 302(5643), pp.269–272. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1087910.

## Reflection 
"I noticed similarities in the writing and visual aspects of climate change skeptic websites. Every article uses very convincing language and a captivating title to persuade the reader into believing the claims being made. Additionally, most of the articles are written using simple terminology and concepts that can be easily understood by a large audience. This may convince readers as they are more readily able to understand the writing, compared to scientific writing often encountered in scientific journal articles. Furthermore, many of the articles either reference the IPPC, discuss professionals that support their claim, or provide a link to a scientific article that supports their claim. This manipulates reads into thinking they are knowledgeable of climate change research that aligns with professionals in the field. Lastly, I noticed that many of the websites include figures or graphs which misrepresent or skew data to support their claim."    
